---
layout: post
title: GIS Support for the MSF Ebola response in Guinea 
excerpt: "A case study created by MSF highlighting the use of GIS during the Ebola response in Guinea."
categories: articles
tags: [Ebola, Guinea, MSF, Case Study, GIS, 2014]
author: MSF
image:
  feature: https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/7816685/8313704/8a2527b2-19b2-11e5-81a4-1ade22daafe1.jpg
comments: true
share: true
ads: false
coord: [9.509,-13.712]
---

[EBOLA GIS CASE STUDY]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/MSF_Ebola.pdf)

In March 2014, MSF-Switzerland deployed a dedicated Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) officer to Guinea in response to the Ebola 
outbreak in the south of the country. In support of the epidemiological team, 
the GIS officer was charged with producing general overview maps, as well 
as topical maps that supported different aspects of the operation.

During the eight weeks of his mission, the GIS officer produced 109 maps 
for this previously very poorly mapped area. The maps included basic 
orientation maps that showed roads, landmarks and villages but also 
specialised maps that visualized population density or the spread of the 
disease. 

Both field and headquarters staff interviewed for this case study emphasized 
that having a dedicated GIS officer in the field was a major asset that had 
a significant positive impact on the operation. 

Universally, interviewees identified two outputs as the most useful: 

* **Localization:** With the help of a newly created database and 
subsequently produced maps, the GIS officer was able to pinpoint the 
exact location of villages and identify villages that had the same name 
but were in different parts of the prefecture. Based on this information, 
MSF programme staff were able to respond to the outbreak faster, in 
a more targeted way and with fewer resources.

* **Visualization:** A weekly mapping of confirmed and suspected Ebola 
cases helped translate the progression of the epidemic from technical 
data into an easy-to-grasp map. As a result, staff at all levels had a 
better understanding of the emergency.

The interviews also highlighted the fact that most MSF staff know very little 
about GIS in general, let alone how a GIS officer could support them. The 
newly formed GIS unit at the Operational Centre Geneva (OCG) needs to 
do more to educate staff at headquarters and in the field about how GIS 
can support operations. For field deployments, this means that GIS officers 
need to be service-oriented self-starters because only very few staff will 
know how to make best use of his or her skills.

To map the areas of operation in a reasonable amount of time, the GIS 
unit - in support of the field officer - crowdsourced tasks that were neither 
confidential nor sensitive. As a result, a substantial number of overview maps were created with the help of close to 250 online volunteers. These 
volunteers helped to map previously unmapped cities and roads within 
a few days, and at a granular level, mapping individual buildings. These 
overview maps then became the foundation of many maps that the GIS 
officer created for the response. While the cooperation with the online 
volunteers was overall very positive, it also showed that coordination as 
well as expectation management can be improved. 

Given the universally positive feedback about the GIS officer’s deployment, 
it is recommended that headquarters makes GIS officers available to field 
offices, where direct contact with field operations can bring clear benefits, 
and where close and timely monitoring of the spread of an epidemic is 
essential.
